Add EP254 Summary blog post (#2851)
quarkusio/quarkusio.github.io: _posts/2026-07-14-quarkus-insights-254-ddd-hexagonal-architecture-part2.adoc

---
layout: post
title: 'Quarkus Insights #254: Domain-Driven Design and Hexagonal Architecture - Part 2'
date: 2026-07-14
tags: quarkus-insights
synopsis: 'Jeremy Davis returns for a deep dive into a call-for-papers application that demonstrates DDD patterns in action: commands, aggregates, value objects, the outbox pattern, subdomain collaboration, architecture tests with ArchUnit, and how coding agents can follow DDD conventions.'
author: jcobb
---

This summary was generated using AI, reviewed by humans - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xUUAbstEthQ[watch the video] for the full story.

== Quarkus Insights #254: Domain-Driven Design and Hexagonal Architecture - Part 2

> https://www.linkedin.com/in/jeremyrdavis/[Jeremy Davis] returns for a follow-up to episode 248's introduction to https://martinfowler.com/bliki/DomainDrivenDesign.html[Domain-Driven Design (DDD)] and Hexagonal Architecture. The first session generated so many questions that Jeremy didn't get through all of his material, so episode 254 picks up where that one left off — this time anchored around a fully working call-for-papers application that you can clone and run locally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
https://www.linkedin.com/in/jeremyrdavis/[Jeremy Davis] returns for a follow-up to https://quarkus.io/blog/quarkus-insights-248-ddd-hexagonal-architecture/[episode 248]'s introduction to https://martinfowler.com/bliki/DomainDrivenDesign.html[Domain-Driven Design (DDD)] and Hexagonal Architecture. The first session generated so many questions that Jeremy didn't get through all of his material, so episode 254 picks up where that one left off — this time anchored around a fully working call-for-papers application that you can clone and run locally.
```

++++
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/xUUAbstEthQ" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>
++++

== Quarkus 4 Update

Before diving into DDD, the hosts shared a brief status update: the main branch has now switched to version 4, meaning new feature development is targeting the 4.x line. On the 3.x side, 3.40 is expected to be the last minor release. The biggest in-flight changes heading into Quarkus 4 include a https://vertx.io/[Vert.x] 5 upgrade and a https://github.com/FasterXML/jackson[Jackson] 3 upgrade — significant library bumps that warrant the major version bump.

== The Demo Application: A Call for Papers

Jeremy built a https://sessionize.com/[Sessionize]-inspired call-for-papers application to ground the discussion. The application lets speakers browse conferences, submit session proposals, and receive acceptance or rejection notifications. Reviewers can then accept, waitlist, or decline proposals through a review screen.

> The frontend is built with Quinoa and https://react.dev/[React]. The full repo can be cloned and run locally with `mvn quarkus:dev` (or the Maven wrapper).

Reviewer 2: Is there a way to get the AI generation to link to things (like Quinoa)? This would help with exposure I think.

Reviewer: Agreed, we should ask the prompt to look extra hard for Quarkus-related links, but to not link at all for really boring links like quarkus.io (which it's done links for in the past).

Author: My typical prompt for these: Created a summary blog post for Quarkus Insights EPXXX.  Use "2026-06-30-quarkus-insights-foo.adoc" as a reference. Make sure to note repeat any summary content from the previous blog posts. Do not add any new tags that aren't currently in use in the blog. Link to the first reference of any technology, product or open source project but do not make reference to Quarkus itself.  Here is the video link to youtube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xUUAbstEthQ and here is the transcript:<add transcript>

> The frontend is built with Quinoa and https://react.dev/[React]. The full repo can be cloned and run locally with `mvn quarkus:dev` (or the Maven wrapper).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The frontend is built with https://docs.quarkiverse.io/quarkus-quinoa/dev/index.html[Quinoa] and https://react.dev/[React]. The full repo can be cloned and run locally with `mvn quarkus:dev` (or the Maven wrapper).
```

Both agents produced structurally similar output:

- Value objects for name and email
- A command record
- An application service
- A repository
- Domain-specific exceptions

Neither output was perfect (one missed Panache, neither added ArchUnit tests), but the overall structure was recognisably DDD-compliant. Jeremy's takeaway: DDD's explicit conventions about where things go — aggregates hold logic, repositories handle persistence, commands enter through the application layer — give coding agents a predictable scaffold to follow. Well-structured specifications plus DDD conventions produce more consistent generated code than under-specified CRUD codebases.

He recommended spending more time writing detailed specifications and reviewing AI output than on code generation itself, and noted that adding DDD-specific skills (prompt files) to the agent configuration improves adherence to patterns like correct placement of business logic, value object validation, and ArchUnit rule compliance.

== Upcoming

> Jeremy mentioned he is preparing an updated hands-on workshop (cloneable from GitHub) based on this material, and will be co-presenting a similar workshop with Rob Cedor at https://exploreddd.com/[Explore DDD] in Colorado in September. The next Quarkus Insights (skipping one week for the summer schedule) will cover Quarkus in the real world — an experience report with real-world performance metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Jeremy mentioned he is preparing an updated hands-on workshop (cloneable from GitHub) based on this material, and will be co-presenting a similar workshop with Rob Cedor at https://exploreddd.com/[Explore DDD] in Colorado in September. The next Quarkus Insights (skipping two weeks for the summer schedule) will cover Quarkus in the real world — an experience report with real-world performance metrics.
```

let's correct the date
